All right. Good evening. How's
everybody?
>> We're going to get started.
>> Again, before we get started, I'm going
to ask everybody
>> be
>> nice. be nice, right? Um, I'm required
to read this.
The electors and citizens qualified to
vote in town meetings in the town of
Andover are hereby notified that the
Andover that the Andover Elementary
School budget meeting in of the town of
Andover be held at the Andover
Elementary School and gymnasium
Tuesday, June 2nd at 7 p.m. for the
following purposes. Number one, to
choose a moderator for set meeting. Two,
for review and discussion only, but no
action taken upon the budget of Andor
Elementary School for the fiscal year
July 1st, 2026 to June 30th, 2027
as prepared by the board of finance and
voting will be deferred to the
subsequent budget referendum at the
Andovertown community room.
>> I believe that date is June 16th. Is
that correct? Yeah, it match
>> June 16th. Okay. So, the first order of
business is to choose a moderator for
said meeting. Do we have any
nominations?
>> I'll second.
>> Uh, we have a nomination from Wally
Barton from Jerry and a second from
Scott Soyette.
Are we all set for that?
Any any other nominations? I'm just
going to come around to the mic to help
people make sure they're speaking right
into it.
>> There's only one mic.
>> Oh,
>> that's okay. Any other nominations?
All right. Hearing none. The only is
said moderator.
>> Okay. Couple of housekeeping things.
This is the open market. It's functional
tonight. So, anyone that hasn't wants to
come up and speak, you're going to have
to come up here and it'll be used by
We're good. The board has selected the
board of finance and whoever wants to
speak. At this time, I'll turn it over
to the chair of the board of finance to
give his presentation.
>> Yeah. Thanks for All right, everybody.
Since this is the third time we're going
through this, I somewhat
focusing on the change.
So, this is a recap, right? This first
page is everything that's happened up
until the last referendum. So, we've
been through this already. Um, as you
can see, you know, there's been a lot.
We originally failed at referendum.
Board of Finance made a $50,000 cut to
AES. That was also rejected at
referendum.
So, here we are.
At our last meeting, the day after the
last referendum, we voted to decrease
the AES budget increase request to 6%.
Down from the 9.82 I think we were at.
It's about $175,000 cut. That puts their
budget request at 4,839,38972.
Ram's operational budget also their
capital task their operation which is
much larger
failed. They met last night. My
understanding is that they made a
reduction to their operational budget of
about 254,000. I've got info from their
finance office as to our levy. The
resulting decrease for us is 32,187.
If you put those two together, that
brings the total expenditure number. If
you guys picked up the handout, it's
reduced by that 32,000. We already baked
in the border of finance change, but of
course since what Rand did happened last
night, there wasn't time. So that's why
you might see a mischiev
13 million 306225
for total expenditures 3.1 3.15.
Now, we have this year, as we've
discussed in private past meetings, and
I can go through it again if people have
specific questions, if you want to hear
if you're curious, but we have some
offsets, some additional revenue, some
oneshot deal kind of things, uh the RAM
offset for our levy because they had too
much money built up, the state aid
supplemental, etc. The result of this
means the amount that we need to raise
by taxation is just over $10 million.
10,99,572
which is just shy of a 1% gains due to
increases in the grand list. What this
works out to for the mill rate is that
we're basically flat. We were 31.59
last year. I'm getting 31.58
as things stand today.
This is just a snapshot of where we are
in terms of the various expenditures. As
you know, the town budget passed, so
that's baked in. And what remains is RAM
and the end of a BOE.
Those are the numbers as up to date as I
can get them.
So this is just the how we calculate the
mill rate. As you can see uh here the
taxable grand list if you look at that
number it's up a bit this year
presumably some new construction and
such like and that is why you can have
the amount
raised by taxation go up 1% but have
them already flat so your individual tax
would be flat if your assessment hasn't
changed we don't have a reval till next
year
so this is just my I reid this as my
little fiveyear look back chart
of what the amount to be raised by
taxation, which again isn't necessarily
exactly your taxation level because
changes in the grand list, but this
would have us, if we were to pass this
combined budget now, we would be at 7.3%
over 6 years. That's where we stand
tonight.
And that's it. I I wanted to pair this
down and keep it short and sweet. If you
want, you can go back and recap
something that you're curious about from
past meetings. I'm happy to do that in
question and answer time. But I'm going
to leave it there and I'm going to leave
and see what's for the best. We'll leave
it there.
And then what I'd like to do since my
presentation was so short is I know that
the remaining
question is about the budget. We have
the end over BOE here and Caitlyn, their
chair, asked if she could have some time
to address that budget. So, I'd really
like to do is bring Caitlyn up uh and
then we do the question and answer
after.
He said he doesn't have the software.
>> I have a discountility because
I'm sorry.
>> Okay. So, there should be hard copies of
our budget that are outside there by the
door. Does anyone need one that didn't
get one on the way?
>> Um, so we've been here a couple times
already at town meeting. Um, we
definitely can answer whatever questions
that you guys may have specific to our
budget since it's the only thing that
didn't that has yet to pass, right? So,
it's what we'll be voting on in addition
to RAM. Um, but really just wanted to
say um there there will have to be cuts
with the 6% increase to address any
parents that are in the room, like real
real substantial cuts um for us to get
to that number. So, if you're going to
ask if it's going to affect students
directly, 100% it will. We don't have a
way around that. Um, so
if anyone has specific questions about
line items within the budget,
>> can you give more information about how
it will affect?
>> So, I can't. Um, the superintendent
might be able to. We haven't met as a
board yet and we wouldn't make those
decisions until after this budget passes
if it passes.
>> Okay. Um but I think the way you're
supposed to do this is to say your name
and then ask the questions. Yeah.
>> Hi Ashley Johnson. Lake Road 191. Um, I
was just wondering if you could give us
more information about how this will
affect uh students with the budget
changes because
I mean honestly I kind of like the 6%.
Um, but yeah, I would like to know how
is this going to affect our students?
How is this going to affect us moving
forward? And what can we as a community
do to help make up the difference
through volunteer or anything else?
>> Well, as the chairperson um said, this
will be a decision that the board will
have to make. There will be a list of
proposed ideas for the full board at the
board meeting this week. I'm working
with the principal, the special
director, the teacher union for us to
look and figure out what they would be.
What's on the table so far, again, in no
particular order because there's a lot
of things that we're going to have to
look at on the table is um the loss of
two parent educators.
um have spoken with that union. Um that
that is on the table. Um the not hiring
of a new teacher for sixth grade and
having to reconfigure existing staff
because there does need to be attention
to those sixth graders.
Um on the table is the loss of the
library.
On the table is the loss of Spanish.
We've already spoken. on the table is
the loss of uh the addition of art back
down to uh potentially two to three
days.
Um on the table is the collapsing of one
of the grades in first, second or third.
Um it would be second or third. Uh we
have to look at the not only number of
students but the needs one of those
three grades. I won't tell you which one
at this point, but one of those three
rates has a student population of 50% of
students with particular programs. When
I say individualized programs, I mean
some that are special education with an
IEP or 504, some that are talented and
gifted, some that are ELLL. All of those
are individualized needs for those
particular students. So, we have to
reevaluate which grades we would be
looking at, but beyond a shadow of a
doubt, there's loss of staff. Just not
sure where that loss of staff will be.
That's not a maybe at this point. That's
a definite. Um, and I know that
sometimes people are like, well, they're
just saying that. Well, that's a
definite because that's what was
budgeted in to the budget and something
has to give. And as we know, we can't
take from the medical benefits. you
know, we can't take from, you know, a
lot of other existing staff. So, those
are all the things that are on the
table. Again, I'll present them
officially on Wednesday next week to the
board. Um, but there aren't any
decisions that will be able to be made
at this point until the number comes
through and the board has to weigh all
of the factors surrounding that.
>> Anyone else with a question?
Luis Goodwin 91 Lakeside. I wanted to
read a letter um an email that I
received from Linda Der in regards to
the
I can open
the petition.
Uh she sent to us actually a copy of the
petition 87 people says please find a
petition that spoke to at the 527 BOF
meeting. This is a group of thoughtful,
informed, longtime Andover community
folks voters. The intention of the
petition was to be helpful in guiding
the process towards an optimal outcome.
People were dedicated to sign and
contribute the voice and there were some
who felt some concern of retribution
from the school board and reg and
requested that emails phone numbers be
deleted.
I have respected that concern here. We
collectively subtitled the petition vote
yes just for the just for less. All
support the school in the greater
context of the town financial
well-being. Thank you each of you for
your all your efforts on our behalf.
Linda and just want to make sure that
was recognized. Thank you.
>> Other questions?
uh Donald.
Um first of all, we all support
education. We have a great school. We
have good enrollment. We have terrific
thoughtful superintendent.
But obviously 11% was too much and 9.82%
is still too much. So, we have
reasonable class sizes, we have limited
means, but at the same time, this has
been a difficult economy for a lot of
people, and it's time to tighten the
belt a little bit. So,
the board of finance presented a 7.5%
increase suggestion initially. Is that
correct?
>> No, we
recommended 7.5.
So, um, which I think that would be
reasonable. So, I'm just like to know
where the 6% came from. And we certainly
know that the board of education will do
whatever they can to minimize
student uh, activities and student
participation as far as budget
decreases. But, I just like to know
where you guys got that number from.
>> All right. I'll address that and maybe
I'll let my worst board have their
thoughts but uh we had a finance meeting
and right after the meeting at that
meeting there were various proposals for
um I believe the low end was 3.5
there was a lot of discussion and debate
>> and ultimately we had four votes for six
it's by its nature arbitrary you know
it's an attempt to get attempt to get it
passed and at the same time try to
preserve serve,
you know, a functional school
>> so you know we were we went at it for 2
hours and that's when we ended up
basically because we had competing
ideas. We talked about 3.5, we talked
about five, we talked about 5.5, we
talked about 7.5 and we ended up at six.
Best I got for you.
>> You have any further?
>> Yeah. So, yeah. So, we know we have
reasonable class sizes. We have a I mean
I've said this in previous meetings that
um our superintendent kept kept the
school open during the pandemic.
Teachers worked hard.
Our teachers are they're they're well
paid but they don't just work 180 days.
So, I would have been comfortable 7.5,
but uh 6% I think it's time to pass this
budget and um with them go to work to
trim it down and carry on. Thank you.
Anyone else?
>> Yes.
Put the hand up.
You're all raising your hand and then
pointing.
>> Hi, I just thought I'm Linda Fish Towns
and Road. Um, just a simple question. I
was looking at the educational budget
and there were two things I couldn't
find anywhere on the budget sheet. Um,
one was legal fees. Does the school have
legal fees included in there and where
are they and how much are they? And the
other one is Andover Hear Youth
Services. I couldn't find a line item
with that. I was wondering what that
song is. That's it. Thank you.
So, AHN um is in the town budget. It's
not in the school budget. Um so, that's
why you can't find AHM. Um as far as
legal fees, we definitely have legal
fees. Um we've had to do contracts uh
for the bathroom capital project this
year. We've had FOI requests. Um there's
there's been a numerous amount of things
for legal fees. Just trying to find you
the um exact line item number for it.
It's line 2310.
>> And what' you say?
and
>> sorry. So, it's under um the section
that has uh professional services um on
page two. Um so, it's 340 and then it's
the third one down that says other
professional services board.
Anyone else?
All right. My name is Betty Parish and
I'm the 151 website. Um, so I have two
issues and then one question.
The first issue is is what is the real
tuition for AES? We're being told that
it's about 19,0002 per student, but that
might be a few years old. Using most
recent enrollment figures from the May
um board of ed meeting and advancing the
grades to reflect the next school year,
it looks like we're going to have about
185 students K through six. At 19 per
year, that should give us about a $3.5
million budget. At $22,000 a year, that
would give us a $4 million budget. So to
get a $4.8 $8 million budget, our per
people pupil spending is going to be
about 26150.
Um, so we we keep being told that we're
so much less than everybody else, but
we're really not. So what does it cost
for the pre per student for preschool?
At 65 students and a budget of 436,000,
the cost per student is about $7,000.
And when you add the employee benefits
for the preschool that are within the AE
AES budget, the cost is closer to
$10,000 per student. So why is our
tuition only $6,000?
If you increase the um tuition to about
$7,500 per student, using only twothirds
of those students because not all of
whom are paying full tuition, that would
add about $60,000. Um while it would not
completely pay for the cost of the
preschool teacher benefits, it sure
would help. So my second point is is the
Connecticut general state uh statute
section 9-369B
prohibits the expenditure of public
funds to influence voters by a
superintendent on a pending referendum.
The three-part test includes was the
communication made while the referendum
was pending. Does the communication
advocate? And was the communication made
with public funds? Section 9369B is not
limited to traditional out-ofpocket
expenditures like newspaper
advertisements or printed flyers. The
statute also prohibits an inind
expenditures of public resources. An
inind expenditure occurs whenever
district resources whether tangible or
intangible are used to support advocacy.
Examples of this would include use of
district supplies and equipment, use of
district personnel during work hours,
preferred use of district space or
facilities, and the use of districts
website, Facebook pages, parent email
accounts, and other electronic
communication platforms. I believe that
the online YouTube communication that
our superintendent schools put out to
the parents on April 29th is in
violation of this statute and any use of
school resources for this purpose should
be addressed. My last one is a question.
When it's agreed that the solar panels
would be added to the roof of AES, the
town administrators stated in writing
that it should decrease the electric
bills by about a half. In the current
year budget, we have $80,000 almost in
electric costs. And in the proposed
budget, that line has not decreased. It
looks like there's at least $40,000
um of padding in this budget line. And
and I want to know why have we not
decreased that?
So specifically in regards to solar
because we have talked about this a few
times. Um the solar panels were recently
activated what about a month or a month
and a half ago. Um it will take one full
year before they start to actually earn
us money that's reflected in our costs.
So you'll see that line item actually
decrease in another year.
um myself personally having solar on my
house, it's that's exactly how it worked
for us as well. So
um that that will start to see reflected
after another year.
>> We also have solar and like it's like
almost immediately.
>> Yes. But um so if you're doing it
privately on your home and you're and
you have that with Eversource, that's
different than being a leased program
through a contractor. It's it's
affiliated with Eversource, but we don't
own those panels. we didn't pay anything
for them. Um, it's a lease agreement.
So, the the way that we get that money
back in energy savings works a little
bit different than as a private
homeowner.
>> I just wanted to say one one thing about
the peripheral costs because this is
something that I think um can be
confusing to residents and I think it's
helpful to just talk about that a little
bit. There are different ways of
calculating that. The state has a
website where they calculate the figure,
but they do things under the hood that
are frankly, I think, confusing to a lay
person. They do things like pulling down
special education costs and not
counting. So, that's why you'll get a
figure on one figure, you'll look it up
because it'll say 19,000 or something
like that. Okay? When you do the basic
math, you know, about 190 kids in the
school, this is the budget, you get to
about 26. And that's the total the real
total cost, right? not that kind of
bespoke state way of calculating it.
Now, we've bounced around between about
25 26k per student per year. We've for
some uh I think we bottomed out around
24 and a half. So, it's not like, you
know, 26 is wildly uh different than in
past years. The other thing you have to
keep in mind is, you know, we we're
always talking about this in nominal
dollars. If you go back five years and
you see that we paid $25,000 a kid and
we're looking at paying $26,000 a kid
this year, just keep in mind that's
nominal figure that is not adjusting for
inflation. So I just want to throw that
out there that there are at least two or
three different ways of calculating per
cable costs and people get confused by
this all the time. I know I did it. So
the way I always default to doing it,
you know, is the dumb math way. Frankly,
I just take the number of students
divide the budget, you know, instead of
pulling out things like spent because
that just complicates the matter. I
think it just confuses people.
[clears throat]
>> Hi folks, Scott, Boston Hill. Um,
I may be part of the reason you're
confused about that 19,000 versus other
numbers. 19,000 is what the state does
to compare districts. It and this isn't
the special ed thing. This is a really
really simple. How's the total number of
students in the school? What's the total
budget divide? That's
it misses things. the 25 or 26 is more
accurate in terms of uh K through six
preschool because we have a large
preschool that lowers the number um
>> yeah so that that's that's where those
those numbers come from this is the
states things they do for comparison
they give you these numbers they say
here's all the students and divide by
and it really ends up with 19 something
I don't the details um the but the other
number the 26th number is is more
accurate absolutely reflects what we
spend for the K through six because the
preschool program actually it is
self-funding. There's about there with
the grants and so on and I've got
reports I can show to people that that
explain this um and I'll hand out this
showing people where where to get them
if they want. Um,
but it is it's about9 $92,000
approximately. And u
tells me I'm I'm being conservative, but
it's actually less than that. Um, I
can't
we can't verify that because that
includes um money that she can't she
can't tell us what um what the uh
um the benefits are for this program.
It's illegal for her because it's such a
small group and that's according to for
for Ben Hipple law. She can't do that.
But I an estimate of the benefits that's
the program costs about $92,000
and to the town beyond what it what it
it takes in. But there's $200,000
that we are saving because we would have
to pay special ed costs for these
preschoolers regardless. That's that's
the law we would have to spend. And
200,000 is an estimate. Um, it's a
pretty standard estimate. Um, and I did
some comparisons. The lowest I saw was
150 something and the largest I saw was
480, I think, something like that. Um,
200,000 is a reasonable guess. Um,
the other thing I wanted to say is I I
didn't see the flyer you talk about, but
if this flyer just urges people to get
out and vote, this is actually quite
legal. That's in fact encouraged by the
Secretary of State and the Connecticut
General Statutes 9369B
explains how that works. And if people
want one of my reports actually explains
um points you to an explanation from a
law for firm, it's a lot easier reading
the statute. So I think that's it.
>> Anyone else?
Anyone
else
for the third and final time?
>> All right,
Jeff, Lake Road.
I I have to speak directly with Scott's
comments and what really upsets me the
most is that every time we look for
information,
we get Furpa and HIPPA and this and that
rather than get appropriate information
provided to the board of finance so they
can make a logical decision because
everybody understand this is emotional.
I get it. It's emotional. No one here is
looking to hurt the children. The
superintendent is not looking to hurt
the children. The board of sele of of
education isn't going to hurt the
children. There's teachers who aren't
going to hurt the children. What may
have to happen is you might have to have
larger class sizes. And Don, I don't
know what you consider reasonable class
sizes. But when you're talking between
12 to 15,
is that reasonable? Not an educator. I
don't know. But those are the decisions
that have to be made. But every time
that we sit there and try to get
information, do you know how this board
decided 6%.
Do you know how they did it? They didn't
get any information from the board of
education or the superintendent.
They sat there and took the current
expenditures for health insurance and
did some math. No cuts, no nothing. They
just did some basic math and said to
live with what is currently being
explained to the community that they
need that the that the superintendent
needs and the the board of education
needs to educate our children. They came
up with 6%. I understood the math. I
know we're the two individuals who the
newest members who I God bless them.
It's unbelievably difficult for what
they have to do. But let me tell you, if
we could just get real information and
use logic, not emotion, logic to make
decisions, it will help this town of
measurement. And please understand where
I'm coming from, right? Last year, I saw
this happening and I didn't say anything
really. I said some stuff to the board
of finance. I said, "This is this is not
working. This isn't going to work.
Everybody go home and do the math.
Take a $5 million budget and take 6%
every year and compound it and determine
where you're going to be in five years.
It's not a good situation for us as a
community.
I'm just telling you like and I
understand they have expenses. I do. The
health insurance terrible like they they
can't control it. the union contract
three and a quarter percent to the
teachers. The teachers reserve every
dollar they get. What they don't what
what what is not done correctly. And
I'll sit there and I'll look at the
board of five head of education and I'll
look at the superintendent. Look at the
contract.
Don't look at what the teachers get
paid. Look at the contract. Compare it
to Hebrew. Compare it to Marble. Right?
You'll sit there and see that the
extension of the years before you get to
top seven in andor is 10 years. In the
other other towns, it's 17 years because
there was no understanding of well they
they did it for the benefit of the
teachers and my wife's a teacher. God
bless them. They they deserve more
money. But you have to balance
everything you do. You have to balance
the needs of the children and the
financial ability for the town to pay.
Right? It's a balancing act. And if you
don't get any information,
this group has an incredibly difficult
job to do. And if you hide behind Furpa
and you hide behind every other rule and
it's all just talk. It's talk. I'm just
telling you if you want to show the
information to this group, they get it.
So balance. And I'm begging you, please
just look at where we're at. And if you
think that's okay, Don, God bless you.
But
do you think where we're heading in the
the amount of money that's going to be
required year after year after year is
okay? Like, and I tell you here, I'm
going to ask a question. I'm going to
ask a question.
Dr. Greenhouse, how many children are
going to be added this coming school
year?
>> I don't know the answer to that
question.
>> Give me an estimate.
reason
>> in in the current school year
>> coming up next school year. How many
children are going to be adding?
>> Okay, I'll tell you. Well, I'll tell you
what. The superintendent every year
files a report with the RAM
superintendent.
I got that report this year because the
superintendent from RAM did a meeting
for the board of finance,
you know, and I looked at those those
numbers and I'm telling you, we're not
going to add that many children every
year. That's information you all need.
That's information this board needs to
decide how much to spend because this
year you're looking at $273,000
increase in spending. And and the other
thing that you all have to do, focus on
spending, not how we're going to pay for
it. [clears throat] Don't focus how
we're going to pay for it. It's not
about paying for it. It's every year how
much we're going to spend.
No, it's not. It's It's about what we
spend. We can all figure out how to pay
for things if we determine that the
spending is is the right amount.
>> Anyway, if you look at it, you need to
be concerned.
>> Can I try
and share? One thing I would just say to
that is
there is not a track record of going up
6%.
>> There isn't. You go back and you look at
the budgets going back 5 years and it
was -4 was like flat and it was at 1%.
Okay, we are the last two years dealing
with these increases and that's true.
And you know there's a part of you talk
about emotion talk about psychology
there's a part of me that thinks man
they just come in at 2.5 every year we
wouldn't be this having this
conversation we'll be at the same table
so you know let's if we want to talk
about emotion let's talk about how
people process 0000 boom that's part of
the issue I think too also in terms of
expenditure very important line to look
at Jeff's not all about that I think
there are three numbers that I look at
that I very important total expenditure
total be raised by taxation which is not
your tax bill and the mill all three of
those are important to me that's
something that I work on every year now
as to the number of students we got
about 190 I think the snapshots every
October 1st right and it fluctuates
throughout the year you might have a kid
leave town you might have a kid coming
to town but we're about 190k through six
kids personally I guesstimate we'll be
in the same place next
The last thing I'll leave you with
before I shut up is I'll take my little
or finance hat off for a second and just
talk as a parent. My youngest is now in
seventh grade at night, which meant last
year she was in sixth grade and yes,
I asked her a question driving home from
gymnastics a few months ago. When I
first got word from Valerie that we were
going to be looking at potentially a big
increase request, I was a little worried
about it for good reasons.
And I said, "Hey, Ned, do you remember
fifth grade your class, your class was
about 24, 25 kids, you guys got had some
little bit of a hybrid thing that they
cooked up at the school. There were some
additional uh specials that they did. Uh
Christina Frasier, the math specialist,
was brought in to do breakout sessions
with some of the more advanced kids and
and that sort of thing." They had one
class, but they had more resources from
it.
And how how did that differ for you? You
know, with sixth grade where it was just
a sixth grade teacher, right? None of
that. I was just done. She talked my ear
off all the way home about how much
fifth grade was great and sixth grade
sucked. I was so bored in math, Dad. I
have to sit there and listen to Emily
explain something I got the first time
three times because there was no break
up for the more advanced kids. That's
good stuff. I didn't expect that
actually.
All right. And so when we talk about
when you remove resources, you know, oh,
it it doesn't have an impact. Well, it
probably will have an impact. Whether
you decide that you want to fund a
certain level, that's up to you.
But I can tell you from firsthand
experience from my own kid that there
was a difference between those two grade
years that really mattered. LA this
year, we rolled in with a sixth grade
class of 29. I wonder how their
experience went. Um, next year I think
it's 25ish for sixth grade. 23 1.5
something like that. And that was the
issue is do we bring in a second teacher
or not? Well, decisions have been made.
There's no way they can I can't imagine
you can hire that teacher anymore. Well,
that's going to have an impact. You may
think that's fine. That's okay. I mean,
look, you split that class, you're
looking at 12 class size. Okay, I get
it. That's unfortunately that's and if I
could snap my fingers and say 18 per
class, believe me, I'd do it. We don't
get that. we have to make a decision
between the two or do some sort of other
thing. Cook up extra staff to throw us.
So anyway, that's my parental
experience. That's the feedback I got
from my own kid. And I'm going to shut
up. Thanks.
>> Do you guys all know what the average
class size is at RAM in the middle
school?
>> Does anyone know?
>> 13.
>> Eight. How many
>> B?
>> 15. 15. So 12 to 15 students is the
average class size at RAM. That's the
regional school that our go our kids go
to when they leave Andover. My kid was
in a class of 21. He's in 8th grade this
year. Okay. The class of 29 that's
graduating here this year is the largest
class out of all three towns. He has a
cap to their class size of 22. They
don't go over 22 students in a class.
it's actually in their board of
education policy. So when we talk about
class size and you guys talk about that
we need to have a normal class size and
you're saying normal is 25 to 30 for our
area for our region that our kids go to
school to that they metriculate into
that is not the average. Okay.
It's really hard when we talk about
enrollment
um for the accusation to be that you
know the numbers just aren't given
because we all know even if it's the
population of a town you never know you
never know how many people are going to
move in going to move out um when I got
here in 2020 thank you Don for again
acknowledging that we were open then um
I remember I met you first um the
difficulty is I looked at the budgets
from 2015 15 to 2020 when I got here in
2020 and every year they had been
slashed and I understood the population
had decreased. They got down pretty low
from what they once were. So every year
they were cut cut and the elected
officials saying well less kids less
money. If the numbers go back up we'll
expect there to be a rise again. Well,
the numbers went back up and when they
went back up, we were fighting year
after year for the budget to go back up.
In my first year, the numbers had gone
from 175 all inclusive preK through six
to 190. And we got a 0% increase that
first year. And everybody said, "Boy,
you're lucky. You're lucky that they
didn't cut you again." And ever since
then, we've been fighting to the nail to
get back the six and a half staff
members that were decreased from 2015 to
2020.
And we don't make up the numbers. We
don't decide who's going to move in with
how many children um when they move in.
But I will also say look at the plan of
conservation and development because the
board of education is not not giving you
the information regarding enrollment. We
don't know. We don't know how many
babies are going to be born uh that
aren't accounted for already. Um we're
given those numbers from the town and we
hold spots for those kids assuming they
still live here. But then if they don't,
we have to look at who moved in, who
moved out, when the houses go for sale.
We know who moved in if they come to
enroll their children. So we can't
control that enrollment. And as we said,
this year sixth grade rose to 29 at one
point. We didn't anticipate that class
was going to be 29. We knew it was going
to be higher though. So I urge you to
look at the plan of conservation and
development because it was put together
by the town by the town's person and it
says that yes from 2015 to 2020 there
was a drop but that it went back up 26%
and on page I believe 94 or 95 of that
new document it says to the town plan
for a slow and steady increase because
they saw a 26%.
And it doesn't matter if the argument
is, well, it's preschool. It's early
preschool, which it's not. But let's
even pretend it is. They're going to be
kindergarteners and first graders and
second graders. So, even if somebody is
convinced that there's only 15 kids or
18 kids in K6,
there are the rest of them moving to
kindergarten next year, the following
year. So I think that we do have to be
cognizant of the fact look at the PCD
please the new one it's the brand new um
planning conservation development we may
be moving slowly up in that direction
but we are and we can't guarantee which
new kids will move in and which kids
will move out but these are our numbers
now these are our needs now and yes you
heard people say our class sizes we
can't determine I mean if you have 28
kids you only have two choices
a class of 28 or you split them and you
have 14 and 14. And I know 14 is not
ideal, but we only get two choices.
That's it. That's all we get. A couple
of years ago, last thing I'll say is a
couple of years ago, we had very sketchy
numbers. The numbers were rising to the
point of 26 and 27 and 28. So instead,
we had accommodation class two years in
a row so that we didn't have to come to
the taxpayer and say we're going to add
a class because we weren't sure if those
numbers will continue to rise. The last
thing is we can't forget ECS dollars.
The town receives $2 million a year from
the state to put toward educational
expenses. And no one talks about that.
And it's important because that's $2
million of our four and a half grand
that you do not pay in tax dollars. So
you can't take that number, the 4.5
million, and divide it by the number of
students and say that's what I'm paying.
That's not what you're paying. There's
over $2 million in the town offers that
has to be used for education.
Thank you. [clears throat]
Anyone besides bathroom?
All
right. Michelle runs 149 link road.
Okay.
So, I have a huge problem with
belittling HIPPA and verbal. When you go
to the dot, you sign your HIPPA forms.
How would you like it if the town said,
"We're going to collect all of your
personal medical information, take it
and review it to judge how much money
you get." Okay? So when someone who
makes a lot of money says that they want
the HIM information of my child,
please please be prepared for a lawsuit
because I will not give you the medical
information of my child. Even if I have
it, there's no reason for me to do that.
So, I would like you to reconsider who's
leading us when they're asking for fura
and hip information to our children and
really really think about who's in
charge and what they're saying to you.
That's really important to know that
he's saying divulge your personal
information to strangers so that they
can judge on whether or not your
children deserve
the educational needs.
That's that's wrong on so many so many
levels.
Thank you.
Because that's why those of us that's
why we live in Ano is because we can
come to meetings like this and have a
voice and vote how we spend our money
and how our children go to school and
all our roads are fixed because most
towns in the state we can't stand out
here and tell my first selection that I
think that 22 students is a reasonable
And I can tell my board of finance
chairman that he is correct. If we did
2.5% increase even when they didn't need
the money,
we wouldn't be sitting there today. And
I would say to our superintendent
that she was um maybe a little
misguided, they needed a 11%
increase in spending is going to pass.
It's all about what is what can pass
what is how much do people want to spend
on a particular year and this school is
a well-run school always has been lived
here for 30 years. So I would just like
to say that um good to see everybody and
hopefully with a $13 million budget we
can afford more than one microphone at
our next town meeting.
Thank you.
Hi, I'm Miss Lope for finance. Um, I
just want to clarify something. Um, at
no time has anybody that I know
asked for any kind of HIPPA related
information about children.
The information that we have been
waiting since January for uh from the
school is aggregate
the the aggregate cost of the health
insurance benefit benefits, taxes and
other ancillary fees for the preschool
teachers because we know that we are
responsible as a as a town to pay for
the special education needs of birth
through five
and then
>> then then uh you know birth and pre.
>> So by law we should know how much FTE
is required to educate the preschool
children that we have in our town and we
don't know that. So, we know we learned
that the um grant money and the tuition
money covers salaries and then we
learned that other expenses are covered
by the general fund. So, all we asked
was what is the aggregate amount of
those expenses? Maybe it's only
$100,000, maybe it's $300,000. I don't
know. And you can shake your head all
you want. That is what we ask for.
protected
protected information
>> that is not protected aggregate
information is not protected and I will
I will move forward with that request
formally um
because I'm tired of
>> so just so you guys understand aggregate
data would be for the entire school so
there are 30 let me let me finish
>> aggregate data for benefits would be for
the entire school. So for benefits, for
example, the town and the school are in
the same consortium. There are 36 people
at the school who are in that benefits
line. In the town benefits line, there
are three people that are in that
benefits line. You don't see that
separated out on either budget. If we
were to give you aggregate data
specifically only for preschool, it is
such a small number of people that it
does violate what is it? Furpa
>> and Furpa. I'm going to say the names
wrong.
>> Information for uh state. Just talk on
this.
>> Salary information for teachers, any of
our workers in town is all public
information. Um
>> yeah, it is.
>> It's public information.
>> It's public information. It's not
protected.
>> You're asking about benefits.
>> I'm I'm asking about Yeah, I'm asking
about all the expenses which you can
also get from the town. There's a whole
spreadsheet that indicates line by line,
person by person, um, and how much it
all costs. And I'm not asking for a line
by line. I'm asking for those eight
employees.
We have a request for those eight eight
employees. How much is the medical
benefits? How much are the taxes? and
other ancillary expenses. That's all.
And that is not intended.
>> That's a problem.
>> Other question.
>> Hi, Megan. Pine Drive. So I'm not a
lawyer, not an accountant. In this whole
budget season, I've seen a lot of people
present themselves as professions that
they are not. We seem to have a legal
question before us. We have legal line
items. Has anyone asked for a legal
opinion on this question and share it
with all sides so that we can just get
pass this in one direction or another?
So, someone asked if we had a legal line
item in the school budget, and we said
that we do, in fact. And we did in fact
ask our lawyers this question, and we're
told it is too small of a number of
people to share that information. It is
illegal to do so
>> and we shared that with the board of
finance.
So we we go around town and we see the
yes votes, we see the no votes and we
ask you see I've seen a bunch of them um
board of education to open their books
be more transparent. So, um, and I I
don't maybe did you did the board of ed
not sit in the same meeting as the board
of finance, you know, going over these
reductions knowing you were going to cut
the budget. I mean, can I ask my
>> So, did the board of ed you they knew
your guys were meeting and you were
going to reduce their budget and you and
you had offered them a 7.5 at one point
they rejected it. So, did was there a
conversation between these two important
boards in our tile to try to come to
some kind of resolution? And did the
information that you apparently needed
was there information you didn't get?
Well, I think as you just heard, there's
some substantial speaking [snorts] about
who wants what and exactly whether or
not they feel that they can turn it
over. So, to be frank with you, that's
to me a bit of an open question. The
other thing is whether they sit with us.
Well, a number of board of ed people
typically will attend our meetings, but
they're not joint meetings except for
one. We do try to have a trial meeting
once a year, but it's way back in the
fall. And that's actually when we first
got that we might be in trouble this
year because of the healthcare cost
increase tipped us off in like I want to
say October.
Uh, and at that point it was 15%, it
went up to 21. We got really hammered.
Um, so no, I mean they don't it's not a
general need. The board of finance is
going to do what we did. They did the
principal certainly we got a letter from
the principal about the impact of
potential cuts. The board of ed
repeatedly told us about how much they
really feel felt they needed the
increase but at the end of the day we
had to make the call as a result of the
referendum results. So that's I mean no
we didn't sit down with them in a joint
meeting and say okay guys if we cut you
to six what's the impact and the the
honest answer even tonight is they don't
they haven't determined that
>> yeah that's that's that's a little
that's a little disconcerting that uh I
mean you knew you're going to see
reductions and you didn't make any an
effort to come and I guess negotiate
would be the uh term now the other thing
is and I ask our superintendent and I've
heard this in the audience. I've heard
it in town hall and um the uh preschool
seems to be a controversial subject. So,
um maybe you can explain to us are there
people in and in Manchester or Andover
that are using different addresses or do
we do we check to make sure that
everyone is paying what they're supposed
to pay whether they pay in and because
And residents pay pay less, right?
No, no. If you explain because I I want
to do I don't want to say the wrong
thing here. Thank you, dear.
>> Um, so preschool in every town is that
only program where um you can take
non-residents without going by the
policy. uh in it's it's separate uh in
almost every town in terms of the
requirements for the state. Uh special
ed preschool is a requirement. Your
towel is responsible for your students
from you know the the age that they are
three all the way until they exit the
system. In most cases it's graduating
from high school. In some cases it's
afterwards until the 26th. So, so
preschool is considered three.
>> Um, 2.9 is when they can start, but
three, yes.
>> And two, two years of preschool.
>> Three for many kids because they changed
the law and you have to be 5 years old
as of September 1st to enter
kindergarten. So, for us, that also
changed the number of preschoolers that
we had. Now, in terms of what it costs,
um, the tuition here is in fact $6,000 a
year. I know a number of people have
said, "Why can't you raise the tuition?"
Uh, notice a couple of things. I mean,
that is not there's no line item in the
budget for preschool. All eight of those
salaries are paid from the other revenue
sources, which are grants and tuition.
Now, if we did increase the tuition for
you, right?
>> Sure, we could. That money would stay in
preschool.
You're not going to offset your other
building expenses
with the tuition. The tuition stays with
preschool program and it has paid those
eight salaries. We've explained on
multiple occasions that the state right
now is in influx. They are changing the
state program for early start.
And I've said on multiple occasions,
they're kind of unfortunately sorry,
state of Connecticut. They're building a
plane, so to speak, as it flies. And
they haven't quite decided what the
trajectory is going to be moving forward
for universal preschool, but they have
determined that the preschool program
will be universal by 2028, so the 2728
school year.
They've also told us in the numerous
meetings that we've been in that in
terms of funding moving forward, the
slots, the grant slots that were given,
we have 22 and 13 for our two different
grants. They currently reimburse $6,000
for each student that fills one of those
slots. Those slots are determined by a
couple of factors. You can be a child
that takes that slot. Um, if you're
special education, you can be a child
that takes that slot for that funding
from the state grant if you have a
reduction in income in your house.
There's a number of qualifications to be
eligible to fill that slot. Doesn't mean
you're free unless you're special
education,
but we get that money.
We had four classrooms this past year,
the year before. those programs were not
fully full with the handover residents.
So let's say the room holds 18 kids and
you have 15 kids in there. Why didn't
you fill those other three slots with
eligible kids that are not special
education that are going to pay
full-time tuition to continue to offset
the costs of those rooms as long as it's
appropriate for that mom? It would be
silly not to. And we've done that. We've
done that to serve the public well so
that we can bring in that extra $6,000
for each of those seats. Now, moving
forward, I know it's easy to say just
increase tuition and bring in more money
there. We don't know what the rules are
going to be on this plane that they're
building as they fly. And I can tell you
because I sit on all of those meetings
weekly that the incentivization is if
you're going to 2.9ers,
if you're going to build your program to
take out of towners, [clears throat] if
you're considered a workplace care
program, meaning you service your
employees, teachers, children, all of
these things are on the table. If you're
full-time, if you can offer six to six,
which we can because the pool program is
housed here. We don't control it, but we
have an opportunity to say to families,
working families, we can be a six to six
program for you. All of these things are
boxes that we're trying to check so that
moving forward,
we're going to be eligible for more
money when it comes in in the 27 28
year. I don't want us to be ineligible.
I'm doing everything that I can as an
expert in the field with the help of the
people from the state to make sure that
I set us up right. So, it's
disconcerting when our whole school is
working really hard on this to make sure
that we are set up to continue to get
the funding to have people say, "We'll
sabotage it. Change the rules now." We
we can't change the rules right now
because if we do, we risk the funding
moving forward. And so since we can pay
those eight salaries right now, we can
wait another 12 months to stay at the
state. What do you think we should do so
that we can continue to qualify for that
money? I've already been told
potentially in November that $6,000 will
already go up to 6450.
Why? because the way our program is
designed, the fact that we're NYAK
accredited, the fact that we are an
early start program and a smart start
program. So, it's working. Not going to
change that now because we need that
money moving forward. So, I I don't know
what else to say on that. is we are the
ones that are sitting on these meetings
and if that money comes in we increase
tuition and said we're going to move it
to 7,000 are they going to say to us
well I'm sorry because you now are
charging $7,000 and the state reimbured
6,000 you don't qualify your tuition's
too high I don't know what the answer is
going to be to that and need to set us
up for success and since we can pay
those eight salaries now we're going to
do that this year those eight salaries
are not in budget. And again, aggregate,
aggregate means the whole school. It
doesn't mean one class. It's like
saying, "Okay, you have two first grade.
Can you tell me, you know, which kids in
first grade got a two on this back?"
That's only about 20 kids. I'm not going
to say that I can give you that data.
I'd be identifying them. So, when we're
talking about the insurance, I know you
don't don't agree. insurance talk about
insurance.
>> We are we are talking about insurance
and in insurance the aggregate number is
what the chairperson said Dr.
greenhouse. We have 36 people in AES
that take insurance. That I could tell
you. But if you want me to say which of
the first grade teachers take insurance,
which of the preschool teachers take
insurance, that's not aggregate data
anymore when you're talking about two or
four staff members.
So, and I know they said on the town
side, it was given. There are three
people that take insurance on the town
side. I don't see in the budget anywhere
where it says which three people because
they're not going to give you that
information. I'm not saying they should.
So, it doesn't say which three people
take insurance. You wouldn't ask me
[clears throat]
road. Um the question that that uh Miss
Loren didn't understand me uh was I was
sitting there saying that furpa and I
did say HIPPA are being used to deflect
and not provide information to this
board. I didn't ask I don't really
I I don't need the information. Jeff,
you said we're highly violent.
>> You are.
>> We are not. We're not legally.
>> You're the the person the person in this
room that has more information has more
information than this broadcast or I
know sat there and said you can't get it
because for and what was the other one?
Scott
>> I said what was the other person?
>> No for there's two other but listen it's
hiding. It's deflective. And and let me
tell you, let me tell you, Scott Soyette
sits on the RAM board of education.
Scott should be focusing on the $34,000
a year that we spend on RAM to send our
children there. That's the number that
we spend to go to RAM. It's a monster
number. And we all passed it. Why did
this town pass that budget? Because it
was only a small percentage,
right? was only a small percentage that
ran that we had to pay. It's not the
right thing to do. It's it's you got to
think about it. It's it's it's we cannot
get the numbers. So, listen, let me go
back to what the superintendent is
sitting here saying
in your 411 message. I think it was your
I think you did three. I think the
finance person did it wrong, but the one
that you did where you explain
the children that are in preschool that
need services,
right? There are children that need
services. Correct. Okay.
Did she mention any of those costs
being included in what she said was
covered?
She didn't.
So why can't we even consider because
you know she sat there and said they're
trying to do something with the flying
the plane. Let me tell you
federally then statewise. If you sit
there and don't think that the
Department of Education is in trouble,
we're not living in the same country.
Cuz right now in Washington, our current
president is trying to take apart
the Department of Education. Oh, a
person from our own state is destroying
Department of Education. Do you think
that we're going to get more money
coming forward?
Do you think that the state who's going
to take a billion dollar hit from monies
not received right from the federal
department of education is going to take
a hit. Listen, I'm I'm begging you all
just to think about it, right? And I I
sit there with this group and I go, they
need more information to make better
decisions. That's the truth. Whether you
believe me or not, it doesn't matter.
But I will tell you, I will tell you
that we got $82,000
out of $160 million of funding.
That equates the total town got $30 per
residence.
That's terrible.
$30 per resident out of 170 million or
whatever number of million dollars the
state gave. So, I'm I'm just telling
you, you got to think about where we're
going. So, Mr. D Roer thinks I've taken
too much time, and I will yield the
floor.
All right, everybody's complaining. Let
me make a point for you, please.
If one speaker comes up and talks for
five minutes, evidently, it's okay. And
another speaker, you want me to cut them
off. I'm trying to be fair to everyone.
This meeting probably should have ended
a half hour ago,
>> but it didn't.
>> So, we're still here and we're still
taking comments. Scott Sawya, you have
your hand up,
>> okay, some quick comments. Um, asked if
the board of ed um was committed to the
board of finance meetings. Most ones
I've seen, there have been a number of
board men meeting members there and and
and superintendent almost all of them.
Um last one it was and there were not as
many there at the last one because there
was a concert in the school at the same
time. Most of those people were at the
concert. Um
the what else? um
for him. Um if if somebody wants it, um
the the actual sections of federal law
are titles 34 um section 99.3
and it specifically says groups this
small, they can't give aggregate
information even and that's HIPPA is
title 35 section 164.504
regarding the children not not
employees.
>> It's both HIPPA is employees. Well,
HIPPA is most important.
>> But I'm pretty sure that law has to do
with the children and not the public
employees.
>> The HIPPA law in this case is dealing
with employees, what benefits they take,
the FA laws, the students. Um there is
some HIPPA stuff about the students as
well. I I read that a couple months ago.
I don't remember all the details now,
but those are the those are the things
and I guarantee you sele if you want. Um
I had two more things. Um but one quick
um
this and talk about lies. This came out
passing out lies to everybody
intentionally showing
stuff that he anybody who's seek has to
know is total nonsense. Um and a whole
bunch of us came together to try to
respond. Um it's I do research. I spend
a lot of time looking up the loss,
looking up the charter, reading
everything I can. I got a whole lot of
reports out there. I I'll pass out those
things if people want them with the
links to all those those documents. But
I spend a lot of time on this. I'm not
sleeping much because I'm doing this
because I think it's really important.
Um I'm
3 four hours a night right now and I got
to get back to actual sleep. But I'm
doing this because I think getting the
truth out there is what's important and
we can make decisions based on that. And
Furpa.
Yeah, that is Furp and Hippa are it is
straightforward. If you look it up, read
the laws, they are there. And it's if
there's board, I'll do them on the board
with that those numbers, those those
sections because they're real. And um
Dr. Bruno is a professional who knows
her job. And I [sighs] I didn't ask him
where these sections were, so I did I
wanted to find them. I found them. I
looked them up. I found the purpose
section. I found a hypo section. I read
them and they say exactly what Dr.
Dunell has told us. She can't give us
that inaccurate information. And the
fact that our first selectman wants it,
the fact that members of the board of
finance wants it, it doesn't matter.
She's not allowed to do it. To say fura
is just talk is I'm sorry. That is that
is not leadership. That is mis
misleadership. So
Anyone
new
sun says
um
I expect my taxes to go up. My gas has
gone up. my insurance has gone up just
like
everyone else's. Um I would expect
however that in going up it's something
reasonable that we can justify we can
point to and say hey medical insurance
is going up by 5% this year. I have x
amount of people were going up by x
amount of dollars. That makes sense to
me
when I hear that there is not enough
transparency.
That just
makes all the numbers not credible. And
that's a thing. [snorts]
I feel like if there's something
specific that isn't transparent or
information that somebody needs to get
this thing done that they should say,
"Hey, I'm missing
insurance. I'm missing
the electric bill. Whatever it is,
whatever it is, this is what I need in
order to do my job. It's your job to
provide it to me."
I don't understand why this thing has
gone on since January.
>> That's crazy. None of us have jobs that
we could just sit here and go.
Sit here and wait another 5 months.
This is a huge bone of contention with
whether you're able to provide it or not
able to provide it. Whatever. I'd like
to be educated
tonight about what the importance is of
the number that you're looking for in
order to understand why this is
important and how it affects this budget
so that we can all make better decisions
when we're watching vote no and vote
signs go up in every yard.
>> You want to explain that why that number
is important?
>> Yes, I I would love to know that. Are
you bring speaking or
>> um
>> thank you to everyone and all the work
you do. I know this
>> u
so the reason it's important is because
we have been under the understanding
that the preschool is self-funded
and I don't know if you know what that
means. I mean I think that means it's
fully covered and we're up to something
better understanding. And in January, we
asked the board of education
about that. And what it turned out to me
was that the salaries were covered by
the grants and by tuition.
And I said, "Well, what about health
insurance? What about the taxes?" And
all the ancillary
and
we got yep, salaries are covered. Bottom
line is the answer was because we're
responsible to pay for
um special special needs for special
needs preschool children. They don't put
that in the budget. They put the healthc
care in the budget
and that could be perfectly fine.
We asked can we get an aggregate number
of what that is. I'll tell you most
schools in their budget will show FTE
and how much FTE is
um
is reflected for a preschool teacher for
special ed could be 1.2 1.5 it could be
two depending on the side size of the
school. We don't we don't get that. So
my ask was, can we just get the
aggregate dollars of the health
insurance for those eight employees, the
health insurance cost, no names, and
other ancillary fees? Like how much are
we paying? Because if we needed to pay
for two full-time teachers
for special needs children
at
$160,000
or $120,000
or whatever it is, then we have to do
it. But if if we're paying more and we
don't know it, then what does
self-funded mean? That's the reason we
want to know. And Furba is has to do
with the families doesn't have to do
with um employees of public schools or
municip municipalities.
And that's why it's important cuz I know
what we're paying in the general fund
for our supposed selffunded preschool
because we are not free like $60,000 and
that's all you want. It's just one
number.
>> Like it could be there's eight
employees. Maybe none of them take
healthare.
Maybe maybe half of them. So yeah,
pensions,
healthcare.
Um yeah, it's not a difficult question
and it's also not confidential.
So that's why thanks for the question.
Caitlyn Zimmer Windrush Lane. Um I am a
preschool parent um with and I pay my
tuition widely for a wonderful program.
I'm also a public school teacher not in
Andover in another town. Um there was a
lot of talk about like worrying about
where the budget is going. But I think
you also have to consider where we're
coming from. I was trying to quickly
look up on my phone what the previous
teachers contract was. Did the teachers
not get a step increase in the previous
contract? That's what I thought. So it
looked like for those three years which
was pretty standard postcoid like 2020
2021 2022 that teachers took big freezes
and that wasn't a standover that
happened in many districts. So if you
look at the current contract yes they
are getting a step increase every year
for these three years but it's because
they did not get a step increase for the
previous three years. So you have to
kind of consider where that's coming
from. Um when you're saying you know we
only have the 10 steps to get to the
top. It doesn't take just 10 years to
get to the top. I've been teaching for
12 years. And I think in my district I'm
on step six. So I'm about halfway um for
the number of years of experience that I
have. So just for people to understand
how that works in education, you don't
increase a step every year of
experience. That's not how that works.
Um also the reason you see the budget
increases over the last two years is
because of the loss of funds from during
COVID time. um we had a lot of grants
and a lot of money that was coming from
the state during those years and now
that money is disappearing. Um so
schools are trying to make up the
difference. Um so I just wanted to
advocate from someone that's not an
employee of the school district but I've
worked in two other districts and I've
seen where this is coming from um and
why those increases are happening. And
it's not just happening here, it's
happening everywhere. Um, but before we
jump on, okay, they're getting a pay
increase every year and all the concerns
are changing, I think we also have to
consider where it's coming from when
they weren't getting those increases.
Thank you.
>> Hi everyone, Joanne um Swamp Road. I
just, you know, I've been to all these
meetings. I've been on the board of
finance. I do think it's important that
the board of finance has all the
information to consider when they're
making all these important choices and
decisions and where to set set rates.
The only thing I can suggest from
listening to the audiences and the
people asking for information, I made
the comment at a meeting, we don't want
to know a teacher's name, a teacher
status, what they're doing, how much
insurance they have. I made a point of
can we just could they I'm no longer
with them. I'm kind of participating by
going to meetings this year, breaking
away, but um could they have a list of
just teacher one, teacher two, teacher
three, just say salary so that they can
look at the biggest item on the budget
of over $2 million to just make sure
that it adds up. Um not asking for
anyone's name, just a total. The town
does provide that information. They do
have spreadsheets that they look at so
they can verify salaries and insurance.
Again, not the personal information. Um,
one other thing I had,
you know, I do work in a school system
myself too. Um,
teachers are the hardest working people
you're ever going to see. So, no one is
taking that away. So, we support them. I
I would never want to advocate for class
sizes over 25 ever. I think Andover's
been blessed, you know, to have such
small classes and everybody that lives
here is so lucky. My children benefited
on the back end, you know, went to RAM
and everything um did well. But again,
what about looking at the total number
of teachers and deciding what grade
needs what support different years? So
that's just an idea. Um, yeah, I think
it's we need to be transparent with
getting totals, not names. Thank you.
>> I will entertain a motion to adjourn. I
think we gone around the room. I think
Marcy spoke to you.
>> Thank you. Is there a second to that
motion?
>> Oh, I wanted to say something.
>> Seconded by Don Demo. All in favor of
judgment, please signify by saying I. I.
>> Those opposed.
>> Meetings adjourned. Thank you.